Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: ketamine.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to ketamine. Tell me what it is and what makes it distinctive among
anaesthetic agents.
Ketamine is a phencyclidine derivative — an arylcyclohexylamine — that acts chiefly
as a non-competitive antagonist at the N-methyl-D-aspartate, or NMDA, receptor.
It is distinctive in producing what is called dissociative anaesthesia,
a unique state quite unlike that produced by the GABA-ergic agents:
the patient appears dissociated from the environment, with intense analgesia,
amnesia and a cataleptic appearance, the eyes often open.
It is the only widely used intravenous anaesthetic that is also a potent analgesic,
that tends to support rather than depress the cardiovascular system,
and that preserves airway reflexes and respiratory drive relatively well.
These properties give it a renaissance of interest in trauma, in analgesia,
and beyond the operating theatre.
Describe its structure, and the importance of its chirality.
Ketamine is a water-soluble arylcyclohexylamine with a chiral centre,
so it exists as two enantiomers, the S- and R-forms.
The traditional preparation is the racemic mixture of the two.
The S-enantiomer, esketamine, is roughly twice as potent as the racemate and about
four times as potent as the R-form,
and it is associated with more rapid recovery and fewer unpleasant psychotomimetic
emergence phenomena, so single-enantiomer esketamine is increasingly used.
The same S-enantiomer, as an intranasal preparation,
has also entered psychiatry for treatment-resistant depression.
The chirality is therefore not an academic point but a practical determinant of
potency and side-effect profile.
What is its mechanism of action?
Its principal action is non-competitive antagonism of the NMDA receptor,
a glutamate-gated cation channel central to excitatory neurotransmission,
to synaptic plasticity and to the wind-up phenomenon of central sensitisation.
Ketamine binds within the open channel, at the phencyclidine site,
blocking ion flux. This NMDA blockade underlies both the dissociative anaesthesia
and the analgesia, particularly its action against hyperalgesia and central
sensitisation.
Ketamine also has actions at other targets that contribute to its effects:
interactions with opioid receptors, with monoaminergic and muscarinic receptors,
and with hyperpolarisation-activated channels and voltage-gated sodium channels.
The dissociative state is thought to arise from functional dissociation between the
thalamocortical and limbic systems.
Explain what you mean by dissociative anaesthesia.
Dissociative anaesthesia is a trance-like cataleptic state in which the patient is
profoundly analgesic and amnesic and appears dissociated from,
rather than simply unaware of, their surroundings.
It differs from conventional anaesthesia in that protective reflexes — corneal,
cough and swallow — are relatively preserved,
muscle tone is maintained or increased,
and the eyes may remain open with nystagmus, and purposeless movements can occur.
The patient is not asleep in the ordinary sense.
This is important clinically because the preservation of reflexes and respiratory
drive makes ketamine relatively safe for sedation in less controlled settings,
but the open eyes and movements can be disconcerting and must be anticipated.
Take me through its pharmacokinetics.
Ketamine is lipophilic and has a rapid onset — within thirty seconds or so
intravenously, and a few minutes intramuscularly.
It has a high bioavailability by the intramuscular route,
and can also be given orally, intranasally, subcutaneously and neuraxially,
though oral bioavailability is low because of first-pass metabolism.
It is metabolised in the liver, principally by demethylation, to norketamine,
which is itself an active metabolite with about a third of the potency of the
parent and which contributes to the analgesia, particularly during infusions.
Recovery from a single dose is by redistribution.
Its elimination half-life is a few hours, and its clearance is high,
approaching hepatic blood flow, so it is somewhat flow-limited.
Tell me about the active metabolite and why it matters.
The major metabolite, norketamine, is pharmacologically active,
with roughly a third of the analgesic potency of ketamine,
and it accumulates during prolonged or repeated administration.
This is clinically relevant during analgesic infusions,
where norketamine contributes a meaningful proportion of the sustained analgesic
effect and may prolong the action.
There is also interest in downstream metabolites, such as hydroxynorketamine,
in the context of ketamine's antidepressant effects.
The practical point is that, as with morphine,
the parent drug is not the whole story,
and active metabolites shape both the analgesic and the prolonged effects.
Describe its effects on the central nervous system,
including the traditional concern about intracranial pressure.
Ketamine produces dissociative anaesthesia and profound analgesia.
It increases cerebral metabolic rate, cerebral blood flow and,
by the older teaching, intracranial pressure,
which led to a long-standing caution against its use in head injury and raised
intracranial pressure.
That dogma has been substantially re-evaluated:
more recent evidence suggests that when ventilation is controlled and the patient
is co-sedated, ketamine does not produce clinically important rises in intracranial
pressure and may even help maintain cerebral perfusion pressure through its
haemodynamic support, so it is no longer regarded as absolutely contraindicated in
brain injury and is used in neurocritical care in selected patients.
Ketamine also causes the characteristic emergence phenomena.
What are emergence phenomena, and how do you reduce them?
Emergence phenomena are the unpleasant psychological disturbances that can occur
during recovery from ketamine — vivid and sometimes frightening dreams,
hallucinations, illusions, and a feeling of dissociation or floating,
occasionally amounting to delirium.
They are commoner in adults than in young children, in women,
with larger doses and rapid administration, and with the racemic preparation.
They are reduced by co-administration of a benzodiazepine such as midazolam,
which is the most effective measure; by using the S-enantiomer;
by lower doses and slower administration; and by allowing recovery in a quiet,
undisturbed environment.
Their existence is a major reason ketamine has historically been a second-line
induction agent despite its many advantages.
Now the cardiovascular effects.
Ketamine is unusual among anaesthetic agents in tending to stimulate the
cardiovascular system: it typically increases heart rate,
arterial blood pressure and cardiac output.
This arises from central sympathetic stimulation and from inhibition of
catecholamine reuptake, which raise circulating catecholamine activity.
This indirect sympathomimetic effect is the basis of its value in the shocked or
hypovolaemic patient, in whom other agents would cause collapse.
However, ketamine also has a direct negative inotropic effect,
which is normally masked by the sympathetic stimulation but is unmasked in the
patient who is catecholamine-depleted — the critically ill or exhausted patient
with no sympathetic reserve — in whom ketamine can therefore cause cardiovascular
depression rather than support.
That caveat is important.
And the respiratory effects?
Ketamine has comparatively favourable respiratory effects.
At usual doses respiratory drive is relatively well maintained,
and transient apnoea is uncommon unless the drug is given rapidly or with other
depressants.
Upper airway tone and protective reflexes are relatively preserved,
although they cannot be relied upon absolutely and aspiration remains possible.
Ketamine is a bronchodilator, through its sympathomimetic action and a direct
effect on bronchial smooth muscle, which makes it valuable in the patient with
severe asthma or bronchospasm.
Its principal respiratory drawback is an increase in salivary and bronchial
secretions, which can provoke laryngospasm, particularly in children,
and which is why an antisialagogue such as glycopyrronium is often given alongside
it.
Expand on its analgesic action.
Ketamine is a genuine analgesic at doses well below those producing anaesthesia.
Through NMDA antagonism it is particularly effective against hyperalgesia and the
central sensitisation that amplifies and perpetuates pain,
and it has an opioid-sparing effect.
Sub-anaesthetic doses are used as part of multimodal analgesia for acute pain,
especially in opioid-tolerant patients and in painful procedures,
and as low-dose infusions for difficult acute pain and within enhanced-recovery
pathways.
Its analgesic role is supported by international consensus guidelines on ketamine
infusions for acute pain, jointly produced by the major regional-anaesthesia and
pain societies, which set out the patients likely to benefit and safe dosing.
This anti-sensitisation property also underlies interest in ketamine for preventing
persistent post-surgical pain.
What are its indications for induction and anaesthesia?
For induction, ketamine is especially valuable where cardiovascular stability is
paramount: the hypovolaemic or haemorrhagic trauma patient,
the patient in septic or cardiogenic shock with preserved sympathetic reserve,
and cardiac tamponade, where maintaining heart rate and filling is critical.
It is the agent of choice for induction in severe bronchospasm or status
asthmaticus because of its bronchodilatation.
It is widely used in the pre-hospital,
military and austere environments because it can be given intramuscularly,
supports the circulation, and maintains the airway.
And it is extensively used for procedural sedation, particularly in children,
where its intramuscular route and preservation of reflexes are advantageous.
Give me the doses across its uses.
For intravenous induction the dose is one to two milligrams per kilogram,
producing anaesthesia in under a minute. By the intramuscular route,
useful where there is no intravenous access,
four to ten milligrams per kilogram is used.
For analgesia, sub-anaesthetic doses are given — a bolus of around one to
five-tenths of a milligram per kilogram,
or low-dose infusions of the order of one to several tenths of a milligram per
kilogram per hour, titrated to effect and tolerability.
For procedural sedation, intermediate doses are titrated.
Intranasal and oral routes are used in particular settings,
accepting the lower and more variable bioavailability of the oral route.
Tell me about ketamine in chronic pain and in psychiatry.
In chronic pain, ketamine infusions are used for refractory neuropathic and other
difficult pain states, and there are international consensus guidelines on ketamine
infusions for chronic pain that summarise the limited and condition-specific
evidence and define safe practice; the benefit is often modest and may not be
durable, and the guidance is appropriately cautious.
In psychiatry, the discovery of ketamine's rapid antidepressant effect has been one
of the most significant developments in recent years,
and intranasal esketamine is now licensed in several countries for
treatment-resistant depression, given under supervision because of the dissociative
and cardiovascular effects and the abuse potential.
These expanding roles are a large part of why ketamine is currently the subject of
such intense interest.
What are its principal adverse effects?
The chief acute adverse effects are the emergence phenomena,
the rise in heart rate and blood pressure with the attendant increase in myocardial
oxygen demand, hypersalivation, nausea and vomiting,
and increases in intracranial and intra-ocular pressure by the traditional teaching.
Involuntary movements and increased muscle tone occur.
With repeated or chronic non-medical use, two specific harms are important:
ketamine-induced uropathy, or ketamine bladder — a painful,
sometimes irreversible ulcerative cystitis with reduced bladder capacity — and
hepatobiliary injury with cholangiopathy.
Ketamine also has a recognised abuse and dependence potential as a recreational
drug.
Expand on the contemporary view of intracranial and intra-ocular pressure.
The classical teaching was that ketamine raises both intracranial and intra-ocular
pressure and should be avoided where these are a concern.
The intracranial-pressure caution has been substantially softened:
under controlled ventilation and co-sedation,
ketamine does not appear to raise intracranial pressure meaningfully and may
protect cerebral perfusion pressure,
so it is now used in selected brain-injured and neurocritical-care patients rather
than being forbidden.
The intra-ocular-pressure effect remains a relative caution in open-globe injury,
although here too the evidence is more nuanced than the old absolute prohibition.
The lesson is that some long-held contraindications have not survived scrutiny and
the field has moved on.
Why give an antisialagogue, and which would you use?
Ketamine markedly increases salivary and tracheobronchial secretions,
which are troublesome and can provoke coughing or laryngospasm,
especially in children and during airway procedures.
An antisialagogue is therefore often given to dry secretions — glycopyrronium is
generally preferred over atropine because, being a quaternary compound,
it does not cross the blood-brain barrier and so avoids central anticholinergic
effects, and it causes less tachycardia.
This is a small but practically important adjunct to safe ketamine sedation.
Discuss the abuse potential and the chronic-use harms in more detail.
Ketamine is a controlled drug with significant recreational use,
valued for its dissociative effects,
and it carries a real risk of psychological dependence.
Heavy, sustained recreational use produces the two characteristic organ injuries I
mentioned: ketamine uropathy, a severe ulcerative cystitis causing frequency,
urgency, pain and contracted bladder capacity that may not fully reverse on
cessation; and ketamine-induced cholangiopathy and hepatic dysfunction.
There are also cognitive and psychiatric sequelae of chronic use.
These harms shape the cautious, supervised way in which the expanding therapeutic
uses, including for depression, are governed.
What are the contraindications and main cautions?
There are few absolute contraindications, but important cautions.
It should be avoided or used with great care in severe uncontrolled hypertension,
in significant ischaemic heart disease, aortic dissection and aneurysm,
and in conditions where a rise in heart rate and blood pressure would be dangerous,
because of its sympathomimetic effect.
It should be used cautiously in the catecholamine-depleted critically ill patient,
in whom its direct myocardial depression may be unmasked.
Relative cautions include a history of psychosis,
raised intra-ocular pressure in open-globe injury,
and previous adverse psychological reactions.
Hepatic impairment and the chronic-use harms also warrant caution.
What drug interactions are relevant?
The most useful interaction is with benzodiazepines,
which attenuate the emergence phenomena and are routinely co-administered for that
reason. Ketamine's central depression is additive with that of opioids and other
anaesthetics, allowing dose reduction.
Its sympathomimetic effect can be additive with other sympathomimetics and may be
exaggerated in patients taking drugs that increase catecholamine activity,
and theoretically attenuated where sympathetic outflow is blocked.
Its hepatic metabolism can be affected by enzyme inducers and inhibitors.
In practice the benzodiazepine combination for emergence and the additive
depression with co-administered anaesthetics and opioids are the interactions that
matter most.
How does racemic ketamine compare with esketamine?
Esketamine, the S-enantiomer, is the more potent of the two,
roughly twice as potent as the racemate for a given effect,
so the equivalent dose is about half.
It is associated with a somewhat faster recovery and, importantly,
with fewer and less severe psychotomimetic emergence phenomena,
which is its principal practical advantage.
It is used both as an anaesthetic and analgesic in some countries and,
intranasally, as a psychiatric treatment. The R-enantiomer is less potent at the
NMDA receptor but is of research interest for its own effects.
Choosing the single S-enantiomer trades a higher unit cost for a cleaner
side-effect profile.
Can it prevent persistent post-surgical pain,
and how does that fit with preventive analgesia?
The rationale is attractive: because ketamine blocks NMDA-mediated central
sensitisation, which is a mechanism by which acute surgical pain becomes chronic,
perioperative ketamine has been studied as a means of reducing persistent
post-surgical pain.
The evidence is mixed and the effect, where present, is modest,
but ketamine is one of the agents considered within a preventive,
multimodal analgesic strategy for high-risk operations and opioid-tolerant patients.
Preventive analgesia is the broader concept of intervening across the whole
perioperative period to limit sensitisation, rather than at a single moment,
and ketamine's anti-sensitisation action makes it a logical component.
Where is ketamine particularly valuable outside the operating theatre?
Its combination of analgesia, cardiovascular support, bronchodilatation,
intramuscular efficacy and relative preservation of the airway makes it invaluable
in the pre-hospital and emergency setting, in major-incident and military medicine,
and in austere or resource-limited environments where monitoring and skilled airway
support may be limited.
It is used for analgesia and dissociative sedation to facilitate extrication and
painful procedures, for induction in the shocked trauma patient,
and for severe bronchospasm. In emergency departments it is a mainstay of
procedural sedation.
This versatility under difficult conditions is one of its greatest strengths.
Compare ketamine with propofol, etomidate and thiopental for induction of the
unstable patient.
For the haemodynamically unstable patient,
propofol and thiopental are hazardous because of their vasodilatation and
myocardial depression. Etomidate offers cardiovascular stability but suppresses
adrenocortical function even after a single dose, a particular concern in sepsis.
Ketamine offers positive cardiovascular support through sympathetic stimulation,
with analgesia and bronchodilatation,
which is why it is often the agent of choice in trauma,
haemorrhage and shock — provided the patient retains sympathetic reserve,
since in the exhausted, catecholamine-depleted patient its direct myocardial
depression can be unmasked.
So in the shocked patient I would weigh ketamine and etomidate,
favouring ketamine in most trauma and bronchospasm,
and being mindful of its limits in the truly catecholamine-depleted.
Summarise the patient for whom ketamine is the ideal induction or analgesic agent.
Ketamine is ideal for the hypovolaemic or shocked trauma patient who needs
induction with cardiovascular support and analgesia,
especially in the pre-hospital or emergency setting and where intramuscular
administration is needed; for the patient with severe bronchospasm requiring
induction; for procedural sedation, particularly in children;
and as a sub-anaesthetic adjunct for difficult acute pain and in the
opioid-tolerant patient, where its opioid-sparing,
anti-sensitisation action is most useful.
I would temper its use in the patient with severe uncontrolled hypertension or
significant coronary disease, in the catecholamine-depleted critically ill,
and where emergence phenomena would be especially undesirable,
mitigating the last with a benzodiazepine and, where available, choosing esketamine.
Explain in more detail how ketamine blocks the NMDA receptor.
Ketamine is a non-competitive, open-channel blocker of the NMDA receptor.
The receptor is a glutamate-gated cation channel that also requires glycine as a
co-agonist and is normally blocked by magnesium in a voltage-dependent way;
it opens only when the cell is depolarised and glutamate and glycine are bound.
Ketamine enters and binds within the open channel, at the phencyclidine site,
physically obstructing ion flux.
Because it must enter the open channel,
its block is use-dependent — greater where the receptor is more active,
as in states of central sensitisation,
which is part of why it is so effective against pathological, sensitised pain.
This open-channel mechanism distinguishes it from competitive antagonists that
compete at the glutamate site.
Give me the key pharmacokinetic figures for ketamine.
Ketamine has a pKa near physiological pH and is relatively lipophilic,
giving rapid central penetration. Its protein binding is low,
of the order of twenty to thirty per cent. Its volume of distribution is large,
several litres per kilogram, reflecting wide tissue distribution.
Its clearance is high, approaching hepatic blood flow,
so it behaves as a flow-limited drug, and its elimination half-life is a few hours.
Bioavailability is high intramuscularly, intermediate intranasally,
and low orally because of extensive first-pass metabolism,
which generates a relatively greater proportion of the active metabolite
norketamine by that route.
Describe the routes of administration and where each is useful.
Ketamine is unusually versatile in its routes.
Intravenous administration is used for induction and controlled analgesia.
The intramuscular route is invaluable where there is no intravenous access — the
agitated patient, the small child, the pre-hospital casualty.
The intranasal route is used for paediatric premedication and procedural analgesia
and, as esketamine, for depression. Oral and rectal routes are used for
premedication and chronic pain, accepting low and variable bioavailability.
It can also be given subcutaneously for palliative pain, and neuraxially,
where preservative-free preparations must be used to avoid neurotoxicity.
This flexibility underlies much of its usefulness in difficult settings.
What is the rationale for combining ketamine and propofol — so-called ketofol?
Combining ketamine and propofol exploits their complementary profiles.
Propofol provides smooth hypnosis, antiemesis and suppression of ketamine's
emergence phenomena and salivation,
while ketamine provides analgesia and cardiovascular and respiratory support that
offset propofol's hypotension and apnoea.
The combination, sometimes called ketofol, is popular for procedural sedation,
aiming for haemodynamic stability with good conditions and a clear recovery,
and the doses of each can be reduced. The balance of the two is adjusted to the
clinical priority.
It is a practical illustration of using two agents' opposing side-effects to cancel
out.
Why is ketamine valuable for burns and for repeated painful procedures?
Burns patients require repeated, intensely painful procedures such as dressing
changes and debridement, often over weeks, and ketamine is well suited to these:
it provides profound analgesia and dissociative sedation while preserving the
airway and respiration, can be given intramuscularly or as an infusion,
and supports the often compromised circulation.
Its opioid-sparing action is valuable in patients who become highly
opioid-tolerant. The main considerations are the emergence phenomena,
mitigated with a benzodiazepine, the secretions,
and the cumulative experience of repeated dissociation.
It remains a mainstay of burns analgesia and sedation.
Discuss ketamine in cardiac tamponade and other fixed-output states.
In cardiac tamponade the heart is constrained and cardiac output depends on
maintaining heart rate, preload and contractility and avoiding falls in systemic
vascular resistance — the classic teaching to keep the patient fast, full and tight.
Ketamine suits this because its sympathomimetic action maintains heart rate,
contractility and vascular tone, whereas the vasodilating,
bradycardia-permitting agents can precipitate collapse before the tamponade is
relieved.
The same reasoning supports ketamine in other states with limited ability to
compensate, provided sympathetic reserve is intact,
again with the caveat of unmasked depression in the catecholamine-depleted.
What is the position on ketamine and pulmonary vascular resistance?
There was a long-held concern that ketamine raises pulmonary vascular resistance
and should be avoided in pulmonary hypertension.
More recent evidence suggests that,
in adults with controlled ventilation and adequate oxygenation,
ketamine does not produce clinically significant increases in pulmonary vascular
resistance, and it is used in patients with pulmonary hypertension where its
systemic haemodynamic support is advantageous.
As with the intracranial-pressure concern,
the older absolute caution has been moderated,
though ventilation and oxygenation must be maintained,
since hypoxia and hypercarbia are themselves potent pulmonary vasoconstrictors.
How is ketamine used in obstetrics, and what is its effect on the uterus?
Ketamine has a place in obstetric anaesthesia,
particularly for induction in the hypovolaemic or haemorrhaging mother,
where its cardiovascular support is valuable, and as a low-dose analgesic adjunct.
At low doses it has little effect on uterine tone,
but at higher doses it can increase uterine tone, which is a consideration.
It crosses the placenta and large doses can depress the neonate and cause neonatal
effects, so the dose is controlled.
Low-dose ketamine is also used as an opioid-sparing analgesic adjunct for caesarean
section and for managing severe pain in the peripartum period.
Detail its use for procedural sedation in children.
Ketamine is a mainstay of paediatric procedural sedation,
especially in the emergency department, given intramuscularly or intravenously.
It provides reliable dissociative sedation and analgesia while preserving airway
reflexes and respiration, which suits brief painful procedures.
The particular cautions in children are the increased secretions,
which predispose to laryngospasm, so close airway vigilance is essential and an
antisialagogue is often used; and the lower incidence of distressing emergence
phenomena in young children compared with adults,
which is one reason it is so well tolerated in this group.
Appropriate fasting, monitoring and rescue capability remain mandatory.
What is ketamine's role in opioid tolerance and opioid-induced hyperalgesia?
Through NMDA antagonism ketamine counteracts the central sensitisation and the
receptor changes that underlie both opioid tolerance and opioid-induced
hyperalgesia, the paradoxical state in which opioids increase pain sensitivity.
Low-dose ketamine can therefore restore opioid responsiveness and reduce
requirements in the highly opioid-tolerant patient,
and is used in such patients perioperatively and in difficult chronic and cancer
pain.
This anti-tolerance, anti-hyperalgesia action,
distinct from simple additive analgesia,
is one of the most clinically valuable aspects of its pharmacology.
What is understood about the mechanism of ketamine's antidepressant effect?
The rapid antidepressant effect, occurring within hours and outlasting the drug,
is not fully explained by NMDA blockade alone.
The leading account is that a burst of glutamate release and downstream signalling
promotes rapid synaptogenesis and strengthening of synaptic connections in
mood-regulating circuits, mediated by brain-derived neurotrophic factor and the
mTOR pathway.
There is also interest in the metabolite hydroxynorketamine as contributing to the
antidepressant action through mechanisms partly independent of the NMDA receptor.
The practical outcome is that intranasal esketamine is licensed for
treatment-resistant depression, given under supervision,
representing a genuinely novel mechanism in psychiatry.
How is ketamine used in severe asthma?
In life-threatening bronchospasm, ketamine is valuable both for induction and as an
infusion, because it is a bronchodilator — through sympathomimetic stimulation,
a direct relaxant effect on bronchial smooth muscle,
and inhibition of vagally mediated bronchoconstriction.
In the patient with status asthmaticus requiring induction it both anaesthetises
and dilates the airways, and low-dose infusions are sometimes used in the
ventilated asthmatic to assist bronchodilatation.
The increased secretions are a consideration,
but the bronchodilator benefit makes it a logical choice where bronchospasm
dominates.
What minor adverse effects should the candidate not forget?
Beyond the major effects, ketamine causes nausea and vomiting,
increased muscle tone with purposeless movements and occasional myoclonus,
diplopia and nystagmus, and a transient erythematous rash.
The hypersalivation I have mentioned. Pain on injection is minimal.
Tonic-clonic-like movements can be mistaken for seizures but are not epileptic.
None of these is usually serious, but they should be anticipated so that they are
not misinterpreted — the movements and open eyes in particular can alarm those
unfamiliar with the dissociative state.
Comment on its legal status and the governance of its therapeutic use.
Ketamine is a controlled drug in most jurisdictions because of its abuse potential,
which affects how it is stored, prescribed and accounted for.
The expanding therapeutic uses are correspondingly governed:
esketamine for depression is administered under supervision in registered settings,
with a period of post-dose observation for dissociative and cardiovascular effects,
precisely because of the abuse potential and the acute psychoactive effects.
This careful governance reflects the tension between ketamine's genuine and growing
therapeutic value and its recognised harms with misuse.
What do the acute-pain consensus guidelines say about who should and should not
receive ketamine?
The international consensus guidelines on ketamine infusions for acute pain
identify the patients most likely to benefit — those with severe acute pain,
opioid-tolerant or opioid-dependent patients,
and those in whom opioids are best limited,
such as some with obstructive sleep apnoea — and set out sub-anaesthetic dosing.
They list cautions and relative contraindications,
including poorly controlled cardiovascular disease,
raised intracranial or intra-ocular pressure in the relevant settings, pregnancy,
active psychosis, and significant hepatic disease,
and they emphasise appropriate monitoring.
The value of such guidance is that it brings consistency and safety to a use that
had grown ahead of the evidence, defining who benefits and how to give it safely.
Do tolerance and dependence develop with ketamine?
Yes. Acute tolerance, or tachyphylaxis, can develop during prolonged infusions,
so that the dose must be increased to maintain effect,
which is relevant in long analgesic or sedative infusions and in burns patients
undergoing repeated procedures.
With chronic recreational use, psychological dependence develops,
and tolerance to the dissociative effects drives escalating use,
which in turn produces the bladder and hepatobiliary injury already described.
Ketamine does not produce the same physical-dependence withdrawal syndrome as the
opioids or barbiturates, but its dependence and the organ harms of heavy use are
real and shape its controlled status.
What are ketamine's effects on the electroencephalogram, and is it proconvulsant?
Ketamine produces a distinctive electroencephalographic pattern,
with prominent theta activity and, at higher doses, a mixture of rhythms,
but it does not produce the orderly progression to burst suppression seen with the
GABA-ergic agents, which is one reason processed depth-of-anaesthesia monitors can
read unreliably during ketamine anaesthesia.
Ketamine is not proconvulsant at clinical doses — indeed it has anticonvulsant
properties and has been used in refractory status epilepticus — although the
abnormal movements it causes can be mistaken for seizures.
So it is not a seizure risk, but its monitoring and its movements require correct
interpretation.
Is there a concern about ketamine and the developing brain?
There is a broader, unresolved question about whether anaesthetic agents,
including NMDA antagonists such as ketamine and GABA-ergic drugs,
cause neuroapoptosis and lasting neurodevelopmental effects in the immature brain,
based largely on animal studies.
The human evidence does not show clear harm from brief,
single anaesthetic exposures in childhood,
and regulatory advice has cautioned chiefly about prolonged or repeated exposure in
the very young.
The clinical message is one of proportion:
necessary anaesthesia and analgesia should not be withheld,
but unnecessary or prolonged exposure in the developing brain is avoided where
possible, and the question remains an active area of study.
Does ketamine have anti-inflammatory or immunomodulatory effects?
Ketamine has recognised anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory actions,
attenuating the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and modulating the
inflammatory response to surgery and sepsis in experimental and some clinical work.
The clinical significance of this is not fully established,
but it is of interest in the context of the surgical stress response, of sepsis,
and of ketamine's possible roles beyond analgesia.
It is a reminder that the drug's pharmacology extends well beyond the NMDA receptor
and that some of its effects are still being characterised.
Compare ketamine with dexmedetomidine for sedation and analgesia.
Both provide analgesia with relative preservation of respiration,
but their profiles differ.
Dexmedetomidine, a selective alpha-two agonist, produces a rousable,
cooperative sedation with minimal respiratory depression and an opioid-sparing
analgesic effect, but it causes bradycardia and hypotension and a slower onset.
Ketamine produces dissociative sedation with cardiovascular support and
bronchodilatation but with emergence phenomena and secretions.
So dexmedetomidine suits sedation where haemodynamic lowering is acceptable and
respiratory drive must be preserved, such as awake fibreoptic intubation,
while ketamine suits the patient needing analgesia and cardiovascular support;
the two are sometimes combined to balance their opposing haemodynamic effects.
Briefly, what is the recreational pattern of ketamine use that the anaesthetist
should recognise?
Recreationally, ketamine is taken for its dissociative and hallucinogenic effects,
with high doses producing the profound dissociation users term the K-hole.
Recognising this matters clinically because heavy users may present with ketamine
uropathy — severe urinary symptoms and a contracted bladder — or with hepatobiliary
disease, and may be tolerant, requiring higher therapeutic doses, or dependent.
An awareness of the pattern of misuse aids both diagnosis of its complications and
sensitive management of the dependent patient,
and it underlies the careful governance of the drug's legitimate therapeutic
expansion.
Finally, summarise why ketamine is undergoing such a renaissance.
Ketamine is being re-appraised across several fronts at once.
In acute pain, the drive to reduce opioids has highlighted its opioid-sparing,
anti-hyperalgesic action, now codified in consensus guidelines.
In trauma and emergency and pre-hospital care, its cardiovascular support,
analgesia, bronchodilatation and intramuscular efficacy make it uniquely suited to
difficult conditions.
Several long-held contraindications — over intracranial and pulmonary pressures —
have been moderated by better evidence, widening its use.
The single S-enantiomer offers a cleaner profile.
And the discovery of its rapid antidepressant effect has opened an entirely new
field in psychiatry.
Together these have transformed a drug once regarded as a second-line induction
agent with troublesome side-effects into one of the most actively studied and
versatile agents in medicine.
Walk me through using ketamine to induce a hypotensive trauma patient.
In the shocked trauma patient my priorities are to anaesthetise without
precipitating cardiovascular collapse and to provide analgesia.
After attaching full monitoring and securing access — intramuscular if no vein is
available — and pre-oxygenating, I would use a reduced induction dose of ketamine,
perhaps one milligram per kilogram or less intravenously, titrated,
recognising that in the catecholamine-depleted patient even ketamine's support may
be limited and its direct myocardial depression unmasked, so I would have fluids,
blood and a vasopressor ready.
I would combine it with a muscle relaxant for rapid-sequence intubation and a small
dose of a benzodiazepine to attenuate emergence, give an antisialagogue,
and continue resuscitation throughout.
Ketamine here buys cardiovascular stability that propofol or thiopental would not,
but it is given within a wider resuscitation, not as a substitute for it.
What practical adjuncts accompany a ketamine induction?
Three in particular. First, a benzodiazepine such as midazolam to reduce the
emergence phenomena, which is the most effective single measure.
Second, an antisialagogue, preferably glycopyrronium,
to dry the troublesome secretions and reduce the risk of laryngospasm,
especially in children.
Third, a quiet, undisturbed recovery environment with minimal stimulation,
which lessens the unpleasant psychological effects on emergence.
I would also anticipate the rise in heart rate and blood pressure and ensure it is
acceptable for the particular patient, and have suction ready for secretions.
These small measures convert a drug with awkward side-effects into a smooth,
controlled technique.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Ketamine is a non-competitive NMDA antagonist producing dissociative
anaesthesia with intense analgesia,
cardiovascular support and relative preservation of airway reflexes and respiratory
drive.
Second, It is indirectly sympathomimetic — raising heart rate,
blood pressure and output — making it valuable in shock and trauma,
but its direct myocardial depression is unmasked in the catecholamine-depleted
patient.
Third, Through NMDA blockade it counters hyperalgesia and central sensitisation;
sub-anaesthetic doses give opioid-sparing analgesia,
supported by international consensus guidelines for acute and chronic pain.
Fourth, Emergence phenomena are its key drawback — reduced by benzodiazepines,
lower/slower dosing and the S-enantiomer (esketamine),
which is more potent with a cleaner side-effect profile.
Fifth, The old absolute caution over intracranial pressure has been re-evaluated;
chronic recreational use causes ketamine uropathy and cholangiopathy,
and esketamine is now used for treatment-resistant depression.
Thank you. That concludes the station.